every day we face issues like climate
change or the safety of vaccines where
we have to answer questions whose
answers rely heavily on scientific
information scientists tell us that the
world is warming scientists tell us that
vaccines are safe but how do we know if
they're right why should we believe the
science the fact is many of us actually
don't believe the science public opinion
polls consistently show that significant
proportions the American people don't
believe the climate is warming due to
human activities don't think that
there's evolution by natural selection
and aren't persuaded by the safety of
vaccines so why should we believe the
science well scientists don't like
talking about science as a matter of
belief in fact they would contract
science with faith and they would say
belief is the domain of faith and faith
is a separate thing a part and distinct
from science indeed they would say
religion is based on faith or maybe the
calculus of Pascal's wager Blaise Pascal
was a 17th century mathematician who
tried to bring scientific reasoning to
the question of whether or not he should
believe in God and his wager went like
this well if God doesn't exist but I
decide to believe in him nothing much is
really lost maybe a few hours on Sunday
but if he does exist and I don't believe
in him then I'm in deep trouble and so
Pascal said we better believe in God or
as one of my college professors said he
clutched for the handrail of faith he
made that leap of faith
leaving science and rationalism behind
now the fact is though for most of us
most scientific claims are a leap of
faith we can't really judge scientific
claims for ourselves in most cases and
indeed this is actually true for most
scientists as well outside of their own
specialties so if you think about it a
geologist can't tell you whether a
vaccine is
most chemists are not experts in
evolutionary theory a physicist cannot
tell you despite the claims of some of
them whether or not tobacco causes
cancer so if even scientists themselves
have to make a leap of faith outside
their own fields then why do they accept
the claims of other scientists why do
they believe each other's claims and
should we believe those claims so what
I'd like to argue is yes we should but
not for the reason that most of us think
most of us were taught in school the
reason we should believe in science is
because of the scientific method we were
taught that scientists follow a method
and that this method guarantees the
truth of their claims the method that
most of us were taught in school we can
call it the textbook method is the
hypothetical deductive method according
to the standard model the textbook model
scientists develop hypotheses they
deduce the consequences of those
hypotheses and then they go out into the
world and they say okay well are those
consequences true can we observe them
taking place in a natural world and if
they are true then the scientists say
great we know the hypothesis is correct
so there are many famous examples in the
history of science of scientists doing
exactly this one of the most famous
examples comes from the work of Albert
Einstein when Einstein developed the
theory of general relativity one of the
consequences of his theory was that
space-time wasn't just an empty void but
that it actually had a fabric and that
that fabric was bent in the presence of
massive objects like the Sun so if this
theory were true then it meant that
light as it passed the Sun should
actually be bent around it that was a
pretty startling prediction and it took
a few years before scientists were able
to test it but they did test it in 1919
and lo and behold it turned out to be
true
starlight actually does Bend as it
travels around the Sun this was a huge
confirmation of the theory it was
considered proof of the truth of this
radical new idea and it was written up
in many newspapers around the globe now
sometimes this theory or this model is
referred to as the deductive normal
logical model
mainly because academics like to make
things complicated but also because in
the ideal case it's about laws so Noam
illogical means having to do with laws
and in the ideal case the hypothesis
isn't just an idea ideally it's a law of
nature why does it matter that it's a
law of nature because if it's a law it
can't be broken if it's a law then it
will always be true in all times in all
places no matter what the circumstances
are and all of you know of at least one
example of a famous law Einstein's
famous equation e equals mc-squared
which tells us what the relationship is
between energy and mass and that
relationship is true no matter what now
it turns out though that there are
several problems with this model the
main problem is is wrong and I'm going
to talk about three reasons why it's
wrong so the first reason is a logical
reason it's the problem of the fallacy
of affirming the consequent so that's
another fancy academic way of saying
that false theories can make true
predictions so just because the
prediction come true doesn't actually
logically prove that the theory is
correct and I have a good example of
that too again from the history of
science this is a picture of the
Ptolemaic universe with the earth at the
center of the universe and the Sun and
the planets going around it the
Ptolemaic model was believed by many
very smart people for many centuries
well why well the answer is because it
made lots of predictions that came true
the Ptolemaic system enabled astronomers
to make accurate predictions of the
motions of the planet in fact more
accurate predictions at first than the
Copernican theory which we now would say
is true so that's one problem with the
textbook model a second problem is a
practical problem and it's the problem
of auxiliary hypotheses observing
hypotheses or assumptions that
scientists are making that they may or
may not even be aware that they're
making so an important example of this
comes from the Copernican model which
ultimately replaced the Ptolemaic system
so when Nikolai Copernicus said actually
the earth is not
center of the universe the Sun is the
center of the solar system the earth
moves around the Sun scientists said
well okay Nikolai if that's true we
ought to be able to detect the motion of
the earth around the Sun and so this
slide here illustrates a concept known
as stellar parallax an astronomer said
if the earth is moving and we look at a
prominent star let's stay serious well I
know I'm in Manhattan so you guys can't
see the Stars but imagine you're out in
the country imagine you chose that rural
life and we look at a star in December
we see that star against the backdrop of
distant stars if we now make the same
observation six months later when the
moon sorry when the Earth has moved to
this position in June we look at that
same star we see it against a different
backdrop that difference that angular
difference is the stellar parallax so
this is a prediction that the Copernican
model makes astronomers looked for the
stellar parallax and they found nothing
nothing at all and many people argued
that this proved that the Copernican
model was false so what happened well in
hindsight we can say that astronomers
were making two auxiliary hypotheses
both of which we were now say were
incorrect the first was an assumption
about the size of the Earth's orbit
astronomers were assuming that the
Earth's orbit was large relative to the
distance to the stars today we would
draw the picture more like this this
comes from NASA and you see the Earth's
orbit is actually quite small in fact
it's actually much smaller even than
shown here the stellar parallax
therefore is very small and actually
very hard to detect and that leads to
the second reason why the prediction
didn't work because scientists were also
assuming that the telescope's they had
were sensitive enough to detect the
parallax and that turned out not to be
true it wasn't until the 19th century
that scientists were able to detect the
stellar parallax so there's a third
problem as well the third problem is
simply a factual problem that a lot of
science doesn't fit the textbook model a
lot of science isn't deductive at all
it's actually inductive and by that we
mean that scientists don't necessarily
start with theories and hypotheses often
they just start with observing
of stuff going on in the world and the
most famous example of that is one of
the most famous scientists who ever
lived Charles Darwin when Darwin went
out as a young man on the voyage of the
Beagle he didn't have a hypothesis he
didn't have a theory he just knew that
he wanted to have a career as a
scientist and he started to collect data
mainly he knew that he hated medicine
because the sight of blood made him sick
so he had to have an alternative career
path so he started collecting data and
he collected many things including his
famous finches when he collected these
finches he threw them in a bag and he
had no idea what they meant
many years later back in London Darwin
looked at his data again and began to
develop an explanation and that
explanation was the theory of natural
selection
besides inductive science scientists
also often participate in modelling one
of the things scientists want to do in
life is to explain the causes of things
and how did we do that well one way you
can do it is to build a model that tests
an idea so this is a picture of Henrique
Adele who is a Scottish geologist in the
19th century you can tell he's Scottish
because he's wearing a deerstalker cap
and wellington boots and Kajal wanted to
answer the question how a mountains
formed and one of the things he had
observed is that if you look at
mountains like the Appalachians
you often find that the rocks in them
are folded and they're folding in a
particular way which suggested to him
that they were actually being compressed
from the side and this idea would later
play a major role in discussions of
continental drift so he built this model
this crazy contraption with levers and
wood and here's his wheelbarrow buckets
a big sledgehammer I don't know why he's
got the wellington boots maybe it's
going to rain and he created this
physical model in order to demonstrate
that you couldn't create you could in
fact create patterns and rocks or at
least in this case in mud that looked a
lot like mountains if you compress them
from the side so it was an argument
about the cause of mountains nowadays
most scientists prefer to work inside so
they don't build physical models so much
as to make computer simulations but a
computer simulation is a kind of a model
it's a
model dismayed with mathematics and like
the physical models of the 19th century
it's very important for thinking about
causes so one of the big questions to do
with climate change we have tremendous
amounts of evidence that the earth is
warming warming up this slide here the
black line shows the measurements that
scientists have taken for the last 150
years showing that the earth's
temperature has steadily increased and
you can see in particular that in the
last 50 years there's been this dramatic
increase of nearly 1 degree centigrade
or almost 2 degrees Fahrenheit so what
though is driving that change how can we
know what's causing the observed warming
well scientists can model it using a
computer simulation so this diagram
illustrates a computer simulation that
has looked at all the different factors
that we know can influence the Earth's
climate
so sulfate particles from air pollution
volcanic dust from volcanic eruptions
changes in solar radiation and of course
greenhouse gases and they ask the
question what set of variables put into
a model will reproduce what we actually
see in real life so here's the real life
in black here's the model in this light
gray and the answer is a model that
includes it's the answer e on that SAT
all of the above the only way you can
reproduce the observed temperature
measurements is with all of these things
put together including greenhouse gases
and in particular you can see that the
increase in greenhouse gases tracks this
very dramatic increase in temperature
over the last 50 years and so this is
why climate scientists say it's not just
that we know that climate change is
happening we know that greenhouse gases
are a major part of the reason why so
now because there are all these
different things that scientists do the
philosopher Paul fire oven famously said
the only principle in science that
doesn't inhibit progress is anything
goes now this quotation has often been
taken out of context because fire oven
was not actually saying that in science
anything goes what he was saying was
actually this full quotation is if you
pressed
to say what is the method of science I
would have to say anything goes what he
was trying to say is that scientists do
a lot of different things scientists are
creative but then this pushes the
question back if scientists don't use a
single method and how do they decide
what's right and what's wrong and who
judges and the answer is scientists
judge and they judge by judging evidence
scientists collect evidence in many
different ways but however they
collected they have to subject it to
scrutiny and this led the sociologist
Robert Merton to focus on this question
of how scientists scrutinized data and
evidence and he said they do it in a way
he called organized skepticism and by
that he meant it's organized because
they do it collectively they do it as a
group and skepticism because they do it
from a position of distrust that is to
say the burden of proof is on the person
with a novel claim and in this sense
science is intrinsically conservative
it's quite hard to persuade the
scientific community to say yes we know
something this is true so despite the
popularity of the concept of paradigm
shifts what we find is that actually
really major changes in scientific
thinking are relatively rare in the
history of science so finally that
brings us to one more idea if scientists
judge evidence collectively this has led
historians to focus on the question of
consensus and to say that at the end of
the day what science is what scientific
knowledge is is the consensus of the
scientific experts who through this
process of organized scrutiny collective
scrutiny have judged the evidence and
concluded come to a conclusion about it
either yay or nay so we can think of
scientific knowledge as a consensus of
experts we can also think of science as
being a kind of a jury accept it's a
very special kind of jury it's not a
jury of your peers
it's a jury of geeks it's a jury of men
and women with PhDs and unlike a
conventional jury which has only two
Troy
guilty or not guilty the scientific jury
actually has a number of choices
scientists can say yes something's true
scientists can say no it's false or they
can say well it might be true but we
need to work more and collect more
evidence or they could say it might be
true but we don't know how to answer the
question and we're going to put it aside
and maybe we'll come back to it later
that's what science is called
intractable but this leads us to one
final problem if science is what
scientists say it is and isn't that just
an appeal to Authority and weren't we
all taught in school would the appeal to
Authority is a logical fallacy well
here's the paradox of modern science the
paradox of the conclusion I think
historians and philosophers and
sociologists have come to then actually
scientist is the appeal to Authority but
it's not the authority of the individual
no matter how smart that individual is
like Plato or Socrates or Einstein it's
the authority of the collective
community you can think of it as a kind
of wisdom of the crowd but a very
special kind of crowd science does
appeal to Authority but it's not based
on any individual no matter how smart
that individual may be it's based on the
collective wisdom the collective
knowledge the collective work of all of
the scientists who have worked on a
particular problem scientists have a
kind of culture of collective distrust
this show-me culture illustrated by this
nice woman here showing her colleagues
her evidence of course these people
don't really look like scientists
because they're much too happy
okay so I've brings me to my final point
most of us get up in the morning most of
us trust our cars well see now I'm
thinking I'm in Manhattan this is a bad
analogy but if you didn't most Americans
who don't live in Manhattan get up in
the morning and get in their cars and
turn on that ignition and their cars
work and they work incredibly well the
modern automobile hardly ever breaks
down so why is that why do cars work so
well it's not because of the genius of
Henry Ford or Carl Benz or even Elon
Musk it's because the modern automobile
is the product of more than a hundred of
years of work by hundreds and thousands
and tens of thousands of people the
modern automobile is the product of the
collected work and wisdom and experience
of every man and woman who has ever
worked on a car and the reliability of
the technology is the result of that
accumulated effort we benefit not just
from the genius of Benz and Ford and
musk but from the collective
intelligence and hard work of all of the
people who have worked on the modern car
and the same is true of science only
science is even older our basis for
trust in science is actually the same as
our basis in trust in technology and the
same as the our basis for trust in
anything namely experience but it
shouldn't be blind trust any more than
we would have blind trust in anything
our trust in science like science itself
should be based on evidence and that
means that scientists have to become
better communicators they have to
explain to us not just what they know
but how they know it and it means that
we have to become better listeners thank
you very much
you